## Introduction

<!--
# Things to remember:

1. There is some introduction in the BDS conference abstract, and also in the one for the CSHL that we didn't submit.
1. something like "identify the precise cell type, not only the tissue"

# Important papers


- mention here the funichelo (or something like that) about paper that eQTL are not useful to identify tissue of origin
From this paper, say that we shared the same principle by using gene expression data to infer context, and TWAS to find gene-disease associations (because of great sample size) (another way of saying it is imputed transcriptomes from GWAS)

- From Casey's R01:
"Tissue specificity is also a key feature of human disease and genes with tissue-specific expression are
enriched for disease associations 8–10"
LIST THOSE PAPERS HERE:
   - 8. Cai, J. J. & Petrov, D. A. Relaxed purifying selection and possibly high rate of adaptation in
   primate lineage-specific genes. Genome Biol. Evol. 2, 393–409 (2010).
   - 9. Winter, E. E., Goodstadt, L. & Ponting, C. P. Elevated rates of protein secretion, evolution, and
   disease among tissue-specific genes. Genome Res. 14, 54–61 (2004).
   - 10. Lage, K., Hansen, N. T., Karlberg, E. O., Eklund, A. C., Roque, F. S., Donahoe, P. K., Szallasi, Z.,
   Jensen, T. S. & Brunak, S. A large-scale analysis of tissue-specific pathology and gene
   expression of human disease genes and complexes. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 105, 20870–20875
   (2008).

- Predicting genotype-specific gene regulatory networks
https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2021.01.18.427134v1?rss=1
I like the ideas mentioned in the abstract and introduction of this paper.

- Identification of therapeutic targets from genetic association studies using hierarchical component analysis
Highly related paper.
See notes here https://drive.google.com/file/d/1C-6OGDxo3lG4_1b33prplsZ22r5hwjkq/view
Cite this paper about GWAS component, gene modules, and S-PrediXcan.
Some limitations of this method:
1. They find co-expression modules in GTEx only, we do it across recount2.
1. They use weighted correlation network analysis (WGCNA) to find modules,
   which seems simple.  We use PLIER with prior knowledge.
1. This is how they find a module: ``The eigen-gene component was then computed
   as the first principal component of the expression matrix of co-expressed
   genes''
1. ``Among 44 tissues analyzed, we generally detected 213±89 co-expression
   modules in one tissue.''
-->


Tissue specificity is a key feature of human disease and genes with tissue-specific expression are enriched for disease associations [@pmid:20624743; @pmid:14707169; @doi:10.1073/pnas.0810772105].
<!--  -->
Identifying the function of genes involves understanding the regulatory mechanisms that affect their expression across different tissues and cell types [@doi:10.1126/science.aaz1776; @doi:10.1038/s41586-020-2559-3].
When these transcriptional processes are dysregulated often result in tissue- and cell lineage-specific pathology.
<!--  -->
One approach to identify these mechanisms is transcription-wide association studies (TWAS), which integrates expression quantitative trait loci (eQTL) data to provide a mechanistic interpretation for genome-wide association studies (GWAS).
<!-- Transcription-wide association studies (TWAS) integrate expression quantitative trait loci (eQTL) data to provide a mechanistic interpretation for genome-wide association studies (GWAS). -->
This is done by testing whether perturbations in gene regulatory mechanisms mediate the association between genetic variants and human diseases [@doi:10.1371/journal.pgen.1009482; @doi:10.1038/ng.3506; @doi:10.1371/journal.pgen.1007889; @doi:10.1038/ng.3367].
<!--  -->
However, TWAS has not been useful to detect tissue-specific effects [@doi:10.1016/j.ajhg.2017.01.031; @doi:10.1038/s41588-018-0081-4], since eQTLs are generally shared across tissues.
<!-- TODO: Question: Y el paper de mashr? https://www.nature.com/articles/s41588-018-0268-8#Sec12 -->






POLYGENIC APPROACH

Discovering these tissue-specific mechanisms is crucial to understand the function to understand disease aetiologies and can lead to the development of novel therapeutic directions.
<!--  -->

<!--  -->
Recent newly developed resources allow researchers to comprehensively study epigenomic marks across different tissues and cell types [@doi:10.1038/s41586-020-03145-z], covering
<!--  -->
However, the molecular understanding of the underlying mechanisms mediating the assocaitions of genetic variants with complex disease still lags behind.

CONTINUE READING REVIEW on tissue specificity
- maybe i can say that disease-associated genes are typically expressed widely across tissues (as in the paper), and that we integrate gene co-expression patterns with twas to better identify this

Reading this paper: https://www.nature.com/articles/s41576-019-0200-9.pdf
- (Casey) tissue-specific expression are enriched for disease associations
- (Paper) In contrast to the tissue specificity of
diseases, disease-associated genes are typically expressed
widely across tissues


- importance to know the tissue-specificity in analysis of human diseases (Casey R01)
- HERE WE COMBINED expression-based mechanisms with regulatory mechanisms

the first paragraph has to summarize the paper.





Transcription-wide association studies (TWAS) provide a mechanistic interpretation of genome-wide association studies (GWAS) by testing whether perturbations in gene regulatory mechanisms mediate the association between genetic variants and human diseases [@doi:10.1371/journal.pgen.1009482; @doi:10.1038/ng.3506; @doi:10.1371/journal.pgen.1007889; @doi:10.1038/ng.3367].
<!--  -->
TWAS methods integrate expression quantitative trait loci (eQTL) with GWAS to compute gene-level associations and prioritize potential therapeutic targets [@doi:10.1038/s41588-019-0385-z; @doi:10.1038/nn.4618].
<!--  -->
Yet the typical TWAS approach looks at one gene at a time, missing the fact that genes act in concert to carry out different functions.
<!--  -->
Methods that consider gene-sets of functionally related genes can have more power to detect associations even when individual genes are not genome-wide significant [@doi:10.1073/pnas.0506580102; @doi:10.1371/journal.pcbi.1004219; @doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-09-4502; @doi:10.1038/nrg2884; @doi:10.1038/s41467-018-06022-6], however, they are typically confined to already known pathways and do not incorporate the effects of eQTLs in the transcriptome.

<!-- Pathway analysis considers groups of functionally related genes when studying a phenotype of interest, and it has been shown that this gene-set-based approach can have more power to detect associations even when individual genes are not gnenome-wide significant [@doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-09-4502; @doi:10.1038/nrg2884; @doi:].

Current gene-set-based methods [; ] are generally confined to enrichment analysis using known cannonical pathways, and do not incorporate the effects of eQTLs in the transcriptome. -->


We propose a method that can map existing TWAS results to a gene-module space, which can infer the cell types where genes are activated to exert their effects on phenotype.

Our working hypothesis is that genes with coordinated expression controlled by a disordered transcriptional process will also manifest coordinated pathological effects on related phenotypes. To test it, we integrated hundreds of gene modules previously detected in recount2 (a large expression compendia), with a catalogue of TWAS results on 4,091 different diseases and traits from the UK Biobank. Projecting these gene-based associations into the latent space learned from recount2 revealed how gene-sets are associated with the phenome, and in which cell types are predominantly expressed. After cluster analysis on this data, we found several stable clusters of cardiovascular diseases, hypertension, respiratory disorders, red and white blood cells, anthropometric traits, and autoimmune diseases. Next, we observed that genes in modules driving these trait groups were expressed in highly trait-relevant tissues and cell types. We replicated our results using 309 curated disease phenotypes from the Electronic Medical Records and Genomics (eMERGE) network phase III.





Clusters containing complete blood count are related to genes expressed in highly relevant cell types, with specific clusters for red blood cells, white blood cells and platelets. For instance, gene modules highly associated with red blood tests (mean corpuscular volume, reticulocyte and erythrocyte count, etc) are expressed in precursors of erythrocytes such as basophilic or polychromatic erythroblast. Clusters containing diastolic and systolic blood pressure readings, self-reported high blood pressure, and vascular/heart problems (such as coronary artery disease, myocardial infarction, hypercholesterolemia, angina pectoris) were highly related to modules with genes primarily expressed in cardiac muscle cells, the atrium and the ventricles of the heart. These gene modules replicated the same associations in a different cohort (eMERGE III).

Considering TWAS with a gene-module perspective provides more interpretable results and casts a broader net to uncover causal biological mechanisms associated with disease. Our approach can integrate existing genetic studies with gene co-expression patterns to infer replicable tissue-specific effects on complex traits.
