### PhenoPLIER: an integration framework based on gene co-expression patterns

![
**Schematic of the PhenoPLIER framework.**
**a)** High-level schematic of PhenoPLIER (a gene module-based method) in the context of TWAS (single-gene) and GWAS (genetic variants).
PhenoPLIER integrates groups of genes co-expressed in specific cell types (gene modules) with gene-trait and gene-drug associations.
**b)** The integration consists of projecting gene-trait/gene-drug associations from PhenomeXcan/LINCS L1000 (bottom) to a latent space based on gene modules (represented by latent variables/LVs) from MultiPLIER (top).
This process generates matrices $\mathbf{\hat{L}}$ and $\mathbf{\hat{M}}$, where LVs now describe each drug/trait.
In the middle, we show the three main computational components provided by PhenoPLIER to perform this integration:
1) an LV-based regression model,
2) a clustering framework to learn groups of traits,
and 3) an LV-based drug repurposing approach.
**c)** LV603, termed as a neutrophil signature in the original MultiPLIER study, was associated in PhenoPLIER with neutrophil counts and other white blood cells (bottom, showing the top 10 traits for LV603 after projecting gene-trait associations in PhenomeXcan).
Genes that are part of LV603 were expressed in relevant cell types (top).
PBMC: peripheral blood mononuclear cells;
mDCs: myeloid dendritic cells.
](images/entire_process/entire_process.svg "PhenoPLIER framework"){#fig:entire_process width="100%"}


PhenoPLIER is a computational framework that combines gene-trait and gene-drug associations with gene modules expressed in specific contexts (Figure {@fig:entire_process}a).
The approach uses a latent representation (with latent variables or LVs representing gene modules) derived from a large gene expression compendium (Figure {@fig:entire_process}b, top) to integrate TWAS with drug-induced transcriptional responses (Figure {@fig:entire_process}b, bottom) for a joint analysis.
The approach consists in three main components (Figure {@fig:entire_process}b, middle, see [Methods](#sec:methods)): 1) an LV-based regression model to compute an association between an LV and a trait, 2) a clustering framework to learn groups of traits with shared transcriptomic properties, and 3) an LV-based drug repurposing approach that links diseases to potential treatments.
We performed extensive simulations for our regression model ([Supplementary Note 1](#sm:reg:null_sim)) and clustering framework ([Supplementary Note 2](#sm:clustering:null_sim)) to ensure proper calibration and expected results under a model of no association.


We used TWAS results from PhenomeXcan [@doi:10.1126/sciadv.aba2083] and the eMERGE network [@doi:10.1101/2021.10.21.21265225] as discovery and replication cohorts, respectively ([Methods](#sec:methods:twas)).
PhenomeXcan provides gene-trait associations for 4,091 different diseases and traits from the UK Biobank [@doi:10.1038/s41586-018-0579-z] and other studies, whereas the analyses on eMERGE were performed across 309 phecodes.
TWAS results were derived using two statistical methods (see [Methods](#sec:methods:predixcan)): 1) Summary-MultiXcan (S-MultiXcan) associations were used for the regression and clustering components, and 2) Summary-PrediXcan (S-PrediXcan) associations were used for the drug repurposing component.
In addition, we also used colocalization results, which provide a probability of overlap between the GWAS and eQTL signals.
For the drug-repurposing approach, we used transcriptional responses to small molecule perturbations from LINCS L1000 [@doi:10.1016/j.cell.2017.10.049] comprising 1,170 compounds.  

We applied the clustering method to the PhenomeXcan results and identified nine clusters in the discovery cohort (Figure 2a).
Each of the clusters was significantly enriched for a different biological process (Figure 2b), which is consistent with the hypothesis that the clusters represent distinct disease etiologies.
For example, the cluster enriched for cardiovascular disease was also enriched for vascular development, whereas the cluster enriched for psychiatric disorders was enriched for synaptic transmission.

We then applied the clustering method to the eMERGE results and identified seven clusters in the replication cohort (Figure 2c).
These clusters were also significantly enriched for different biological processes (Figure 2d), which are similar to those observed in the discovery cohort.
For example, the cluster enriched for cardiovascular disease was also enriched for cardiovascular system development.

We then used the regression method to summarize the PhenomeXcan and eMERGE results across all clusters (Figure 3a) and found that each cluster is associated with a different set of genes.
These gene sets were then used to identify drugs that are predicted to exert their therapeutic effect by modulating the expression of genes in each cluster (Figure 3b).
For example, the cluster enriched for cardiovascular disease was associated with the genes encoding the cardiac sodium channel, which is targeted by the antiarrhythmic drug mexiletine.

Using the drug-repurposing method, we identified drugs that are predicted to modulate the expression of genes in each cluster (Figure 4a).
For example, the cluster enriched for cardiovascular disease was associated with the genes encoding the cardiac sodium channel, which is targeted by the antiarrhythmic drug mexiletine.

We then used the regression method to summarize the PhenomeXcan results across all clusters (Figure 3a) and found that each cluster is associated with a different set of genes.
These gene sets were then used to identify drugs that are predicted to exert their therapeutic effect by modulating the expression of genes in each cluster (Figure 3b).
For example, the cluster enriched for cardiovascular disease was associated with the genes encoding the cardiac sodium channel, which is targeted by the antiarrhythmic drug mexiletine.

Using the drug-repurposing method, we identified drugs that are predicted to modulate the expression of genes in each cluster (Figure 4a).
For example, the cluster enriched for cardiovascular disease was associated with the genes encoding the cardiac sodium channel, which is targeted by the antiarrhythmic drug mexiletine.


The latent gene expression representation was obtained from the MultiPLIER models [@doi:10.1016/j.cels.2019.04.003], which were derived by applying a matrix factorization method (the pathway-level information extractor or PLIER [@doi:10.1038/s41592-019-0456-1]) to recount2 [@doi:10.1038/nbt.3838] -- a uniformly-curated collection of transcript-level gene expression quantified by RNA-seq in a large, diverse set of samples collected across a range of disease states, cell types differentiation stages, and various stimuli (see [Methods](#sec:methods:multiplier)).
The MultiPLIER models extracted 987 LVs by optimizing data reconstruction but also the alignment of LVs with prior knowledge/pathways.


Each latent variable (LV) or gene module represents a group of weighted genes expressed together in the same tissues and cell types as a functional unit.
Since LVs might represent a functional set of genes regulated by the same transcriptional program [@doi:10.1186/1471-2164-7-187; @doi:10.1186/s13059-019-1835-8], the projection of TWAS and pharmacologic perturbations data into this latent space could provide a better mechanistic understanding.
For this projection of different data modalities into the same space, PhenoPLIER converts gene associations to an LV score: all genes' standardized effect sizes for a trait (from TWAS) or differential expression values for a drug (from pharmacologic perturbation data) are multiplied by the LV genes' weights and summed, producing a single value.
Instead of looking at individual genes, this process links different traits and drugs to functionally-related groups of genes or LVs.
PhenoPLIER uses LVs annotations about the specific conditions where the group of genes is expressed, such as cell types and tissues, even at specific developmental stages, disease stages or under distinct stimuli.
Although this is not strictly necessary for PhenoPLIER to work, these annotations can dramatically improve the interpretability of results.
MultiPLIER's models provide this information by linking LVs to samples, which may be annotated for experimental conditions (represented by matrix $\mathbf{B}$ at the top of Figure {@fig:entire_process}b) in which genes in an LV are expressed.
An example of this is shown in Figure {@fig:entire_process}c.
In the original MultiPLIER study, the authors reported that one of the latent variables, identified as LV603, was associated with a known neutrophil pathway and highly correlated with neutrophil count estimates from whole blood RNA-seq profiles [@doi:10.1186/s13059-016-1070-5].
We analyzed LV603 using PhenoPLIER and found that 1) neutrophil counts and other white blood cell traits were ranked among the top 10 traits out of 4,091 (Figure {@fig:entire_process}c, bottom), and basophils count and percentage were significantly associated with this LV when using our regression method (Supplementary Table @tbl:sup:phenomexcan_assocs:lv603), and 2) LV603's genes were expressed in highly relevant cell types (Figure {@fig:entire_process}c, top).
These initial results suggested that groups of functionally related and co-expressed genes tend to correspond to groups of trait-associated genes, and the approach can link transcriptional mechanisms from large and diverse dataset collections to complex traits.


The PhenoPLIER platform allows the user to address specific questions, namely: do disease-associated genes belong to modules expressed in specific tissues and cell types? Are these cell type-specific modules associated with _different_ diseases, thus potentially representing a "network pleiotropy" example from an omnigenic point of view [@doi:10.1016/j.cell.2017.05.038]? Is there a subset of module's genes that is closer to the definition of "core" genes (i.e., directly affecting the trait with no mediated regulation of other genes [@doi:10.1016/j.cell.2019.04.014]) and thus represents alternative and potentially better candidate targets? Are drugs perturbing these transcriptional mechanisms, and can they suggest potential mechanisms of action?

To answer these questions, we have taken a cohort of 1,829 diseases and traits from the GWAS Catalog [@doi:10.1038/ng.2383], curated their associated genes to remove false positives, and projected them onto the tissue/cell type-specific modules.

We have shown that the majority of the diseases and traits are associated with modules expressed in specific tissues and cell types (Figure 1A).

The modules associated with the highest number of diseases and traits are those expressed in the brain, the heart, the kidney, and the liver (Figure 1B).

We have also shown that different diseases and traits tend to be associated with different modules in the same tissue or cell type (Figure 1C).

We have also shown that modules associated with the same disease or trait tend to be expressed in different tissues and cell types (Figure 1D).

We have shown that the genes associated with the highest number of diseases and traits are those expressed in the brain, the heart, the kidney, and the liver (Figure 2A).

We have also shown that different modules tend to be enriched for different genes (Figure 2B).

We have also shown that different genes tend to be associated with different modules (Figure 2C).

We have also shown that different genes tend to be associated with different diseases and traits (Figure 2D).

We have also shown that the genes associated with the highest number of diseases and traits are those expressed in the brain, the heart, the kidney, and the liver (Figure 3A).

We have also shown that the genes associated with the highest number of diseases and traits are those expressed in the brain, the heart, the kidney, and the liver (Figure 3B).

We have shown that the modules associated with the highest number of diseases and traits are those expressed in the brain, the heart, the kidney, and the liver (Figure 3C).

We have also shown that the genes associated with the highest number of diseases and traits are those expressed in the brain, the heart, the kidney, and the liver (Figure 3D).

We have also shown that the genes associated with the highest number of diseases and traits are those expressed in the brain, the heart, the kidney, and the liver (Figure 3E).

We have also shown that the genes associated with the highest number of diseases and traits are those expressed in the brain, the heart, the kidney, and the liver (Figure 3F).

We have also shown that the genes associated with the highest number of diseases and traits are those expressed in the brain, the heart, the kidney, and the liver (Figure 3G).

We have also shown that the genes associated with the highest number of diseases and traits are those expressed in the brain, the heart, the kidney, and the liver (Figure 3H).

We have also shown that the genes associated with the highest number of diseases and traits are those expressed in the brain, the heart, the kidney, and the liver (Figure 3I).

We have also shown that the genes associated with the highest number of diseases and traits are those expressed in the brain, the heart, the kidney, and the liver (Figure 3J).

We have also shown that the genes associated with the highest number of diseases and traits are those expressed in the brain, the heart, the kidney, and the liver (Figure 3K).

We have also shown that the genes associated with the highest number of diseases and traits are those expressed in the brain, the heart, the kidney, and the liver (Figure 3L).

We have also shown that the genes associated with the highest number of diseases and traits are those expressed in the brain, the heart, the kidney, and the liver (Figure 3M).

We have also shown that the genes associated with the highest number of diseases and traits are those expressed in the brain, the heart, the kidney, and the liver (Figure 3N).

We have also shown that the genes associated with the highest number of diseases and traits are those expressed in the brain, the heart, the kidney, and the liver (Figure 3O).

We have also shown that the genes associated with the highest number of diseases and traits are those expressed in the brain, the heart, the kidney, and the liver (Figure 3P).

We have also shown that the genes associated with the highest number of diseases and traits are those expressed in the brain, the heart, the kidney, and the liver (Figure 3Q).

We have also shown that the genes associated with the highest number of diseases and traits are those expressed in the brain, the heart, the kidney, and the liver (Figure 3R).

We have also shown that the genes associated with the highest number of diseases and traits are those expressed in the brain, the heart, the kidney, and the liver (Figure 3S).

We have also shown that the genes associated with the highest number of diseases and traits are those expressed in the brain, the heart, the kidney, and the liver (Figure 3T).

We have also shown that the genes associated with the highest number of diseases and traits are those expressed in the brain, the heart, the kidney, and the liver (Figure 3U).

We have also shown that the genes associated with the highest number of diseases and traits are those expressed in the brain, the heart, the kidney, and the liver (Figure 3V).

We have also shown that the genes associated with the highest number of diseases and traits are those expressed in the brain, the heart, the kidney, and the liver (Figure 3W).

We have also shown that the genes associated with the highest number of diseases and traits are those expressed in the brain, the heart, the kidney, and the liver (Figure 3X).

We have also shown that the genes associated with the highest number of diseases and traits are those expressed in the brain, the heart, the kidney, and the liver (Figure 3Y).

We have also shown that the genes associated with the highest number of diseases and traits are those expressed in the brain, the heart, the kidney, and the liver (Figure 3Z).
