### PhenoPLIER integrates TWAS with gene co-expression patterns

![
**Schematic of the PhenoPLIER framework.**
<!--  -->
**a)** The integration process between gene co-expression patterns from
MultiPLIER [@doi:10.1016/j.cels.2019.04.003] (top) and TWAS results from
PhenomeXcan [@doi:10.1126/sciadv.aba2083]. PhenoPLIER projects gene-based
association results on \~4,000 traits to a latent space learned from a
large gene expression compendium (recount2 [@doi:10.1038/nbt.3838]). This
generates matrix $\mathbf{\hat{M}}$, where each trait is now described by
latent variables/gene modules.
<!--  -->
**b)** After the integration process, we found that neutrophil counts and other white blood cells (bottom) were ranked among the top 10 traits for an LV that was termed a neutrophil signature in the original MultiPLIER study.
Genes in this LV were found to be expressed in relevant cell types (top).
<!--  -->
](images/entire_process/entire_process.svg "PhenoPLIER
framework"){#fig:entire_process width="100%"}


(`This paragraph has probably too much detail about MultiPLIER`{.red})
<!--  -->
MultiPLIER [@doi:10.1016/j.cels.2019.04.003] is a recent computational strategy
that extracts patterns of co-expressed genes from large gene expression
datasets. The approach uses an unsupervised matrix factorization method that was
employed to extract latent variables from recount2 [@doi:10.1038/nbt.3838].
<!--  -->
The latent variables (LVs), essentially gene modules, then revealed biological
processes associated with disease severity in rare disease datasets that were
too small for effective model training. These gene sets aligned well with known
biological pathways and predicted cell type composition, even though the
approach was not explicitly designed for this goal.


Although the authors showed that certain patterns learned by MultiPLIER resemble
known biology, most of the LVs identified are completely unknown. Since genes in
these modules vary together in certain cell types and tissues, it's expected
that they may also function together [@doi:10.1186/1471-2164-7-187;
@doi:10.1186/s13059-019-1835-8].
<!--  -->
To test whether patterns in the expression space match those in the TWAS space,
we used PhenomeXcan [@doi:10.1126/sciadv.aba2083], a massive transcriptome-wide
association studies (TWAS) resource obtained from the UK Biobank
[@doi:10.1038/s41586-018-0579-z] and other cohorts (Figure @fig:entire_process
a). These results were projected to the low-dimensional gene representation
learned by MultiPLIER using:

$$\hat{\mathbf{M}} = (\mathbf{Z}^{\top} \mathbf{Z} + \lambda_{2} \mathbf{I})^{-1} \mathbf{Z}^{\top} \mathbf{M},$$ {#eq:proj}

where $\mathbf{M}^{n \times t}$ has gene-trait associations from MultiXcan
[@doi:10.1371/journal.pgen.1007889] (standardized effect sizes) for $n$ genes
and $t$ traits, $\mathbf{Z}^{n \times l}$ are the gene loadings with $l$ latent
variables, $\lambda_2$ is the regularization parameter used in the training
step, and $\hat{\mathbf{M}}^{l \times t}$ is finally the projection of
$\mathbf{M}$ into the latent space: all traits in PhenomeXcan are now described
by LVs, thus we can potentially infer the effects of gene modules on different
human traits.
Since the MultiPLIER models also provide the experimental conditions (such as cell types and tissues) in which genes in a module are concurringly expressed, our approach would also allow inferring the context in which the gene module affects a trait or disease.


In the original MultiPLIER study [@doi:10.1016/j.cels.2019.04.003], the authors
found an LV significantly associated with previously known neutrophil gene-sets
and highly correlated with neutrophil estimates from gene expression.
<!--  -->
We analyzed this LV using our approach (Figure @fig:entire_process b), and found that
1) neutrophil counts and other white blood cell traits from PhenomeXcan [@doi:10.1126/sciadv.aba2083] were ranked among the top 10 traits for this LV,
and 2) that the genes in this LV are expressed in neutrophil cells (see more details in the supplementary material).
<!--  -->
These initial results strongly suggest that shared patterns exist in the gene
expression space (which has no GTEx samples) and the TWAS space (with gene
models trained using GTEx v8), and that the approach also allows to infer the
context-specific effects of gene modules on complex traits.
<!--  -->
We will also show how the approach can aid translational efforts by mapping
pharmacological perturbations to this latent space, enabling to observe which
compounds affect the transcriptional activity of gene modules.


::: {style="color: red"}
- Minor: LV603 is neutrophil-associated, but it is not significantly associated
  with other myeloid lineage cell types (see Figure S2A in MultiPLIER study).
  Maybe we can add a genes-traits figure of MultiXcan and fastENLOC results to
  see this better.
:::
