### Genes causally involved in lipids accumulation are associated with relevant traits and tissues

We found 492 genes associated with lipids accumulation by using a genome-wide lentiviral pooled CRISPR-Cas9 library targeting 19,114 genes in the human genome (see supplementary material).
From these, we identified two high-confidence gene-sets that either caused a decrease (DL gene-set, with 96 genes) or increase (IL gene-set, 175 genes) of lipids.
Next, we used these two gene-sets to assess whether singe gene-trait associations in PhenomeXcan recapitulated lipids-related traits, and how our gene-module based approach performed.


First, using these two gene-sets, we assessed the genes' effects on all 3,752 phenotypes in PhenomeXcan by adding their standardized effect sizes and obtaining a ranked list of traits.
The top associated traits for genes in the DL gene-set were highly relevant to lipid levels, such as hypertension, diastolic and systolic blood pressure, and vascular diseases.
Other associated traits included asthma and lung function.
We also performed the same operation for our gene module-based approach by considering 24 modules significantly enriched with the DL gene-set (Gene-set enrichment analysis, FDR < 0.05).
The top traits in modules enriched with the DL gene-set were also highly relevant, including hypertension, blood pressure, specific cardiometabolic diseases like atherosclerosis, and celiac disease.
This is particularly relevant, because each module in our approach aggregates a specific weigthed combination of genes' effect sizes across all 3,752 traits.
In this particular case, each of the 24 modules associated with the DL gene-set had an average of almost 3,000 genes with non-zero weights (`Add a p-value?`{.red}).
This suggests that gene modules represent functionally meaningful units.

<!-- `Figure here?`{.red} -->

<!-- Similarly for the module-based approach, we ranked traits by summing the values of the latent variables significantly enriched for each of these two gene-sets (24 latent variables for the DL gene-set, and 27 for the IL gene-set; see supplementary material). -->

<!-- The top-ranked traits found were highly relevant to lipids (SEPARATE INTO DL AND IL HERE): hypertension, diastolic and systolic blood pressure, vascular diseases, and celiac disease and rheumatoid arthritis, two autoimmune diseases that usually present abnormal lipid profiles and potentially high risk for heart diseases [@doi:10.1186/s13075-019-1817-y, @doi:10.4330/wjc.v9.i8.652]. (CHECK THIS AGAIN) -->

![
**Tissues and traits associated with a gene module related to lipids metabolism (LV246).**
<!--  -->
**a)** Top cell types/tissues where genes in LV246 are expressed on.
Values in the $y$-axis come from matrix $\mathbf{B}$ in the MultiPLIER models (Figure @fig:entire_process a).
In the $x$-axis, cell types/tissues are sorted by the median value.
<!--  -->
**b)** Gene-trait associations (S-MultiXcan) and colocalization (fastENLOC) for the top traits in LV246.
The top 40 genes in LV246 are shown, sorted by their module weigth, from largest (top gene *SCD*) to smallest (gene *FAR2*).
<!--  -->
SGBS: Simpson Golabi Behmel Syndrome;
CH2DB: CH<sub>2</sub> groups to double bonds ratio;
NMR: nuclear magnetic resonance;
HDL: high-density lipoprotein.
<!--  -->
](images/lvs_analysis/lv246/lv246.svg "LV246 TWAS plot"){#fig:lv246 width="100%"}


When we considered the IL set, genes and modules were associated with a more diverse set of traits, such as blood count tests, whole-body bioelectrical impedance measures, severe asthma, lung function, and rheumatoid arthritis.
Additionally, gene modules were also associated with blood lipids, arterial stiffness, intraocular pressure, hand grip strength, and celiac disease.
One gene module (LV246) that was significantly enriched with the IL gene-set was also associated with lipids metabolism and triglyceride biosynthesis pathways.
In Figure @fig:lv246 a, we used our module-based approach to show that LV246 genes are mainly co-expressed in adipose tissue, and to a less extent, liver cells (hepatocytes), which play key roles in coordinating and regulating lipids metabolism.
This LV was associated with blood lipids, hypercholesterolemia, cholesterol lowering medication, and family history of heart disease, among others (Figure @fig:lv246 b).
Two high-confidence genes from our CRISPR screening, *DGAT2* and *ACACA* (responsible for encoding important enzymes for triglycerides and fatty acid synthesis), accounted for most of the gene-set enrichment signal for LV246.
However, as it can be seen in Figure @fig:lv246 b, these genes are not strongly associated with any of the top traits for this LV.
This strongly suggests that a module-based perspective can contextualize and reprioritize TWAS hits using modules of functionally related genes.


`Notes:`{.red}

::: {style="color: red"}
- Improve description of CRISPR analysis.
- Genes *DGAT2* and *ACACA* are part of the high-confidence set, not the merged one (combining high and medium confidence). We might want to distinguish between them.
- It would be good at some point to have an LV that does not match a pathway. Otherwise, a reviewer could say "but this is similar to a method computing an association between pathways and traits, where is the novelty here?". A potential candidate could be LV504, significantly enriched with the IL gene-set, associated with medication for blood pressure, asthma, celiac disease, and rheumatoid arthritis. Genes in this LV are expressed in skeletal muscle cells, intestinal subepithelial myofibroblasts, embryonic kidney cells, lung fibroblast cells, etc.
- We need to standardize the way we refer to our method (gene module-based approach, PhenoPLIER, etc).

Minor:

- Add -log10(p-value) in the legend of figure.
- Maybe make *DGAT2* and *ACACA* gene names bold in figure.
- It would be great to be able to say "this LV is _significantly associated_ with this trait". Some reviewers might want that.
Maybe we could use the Summary-MultiXcan approach to estimate the multivariate regression coefficients from individual genes associations, and get a p-value for the module-trait association.
This could be a future small project, maybe an application note.
:::
