### Projecting associations into a gene expression latent space reveals expected and novel trait clusters

::: {style="color: red"}
In this section, we already introduced some evidence that the proposal could work. The next step
(this section) is to cluster traits using the LVs as features.

1. Briefly explain idea of clustering traits using LVs.
1. Explain methods here, and then we see whether that should be moved elsewhere.
    1. Dimentionality reduction using UMAP.
    1. Spectral clustering approach.
    1. Stability measure to detect best number of clusters.
    1. Approach to interpret clusters by training a decision tree classifier.
1. We should have a set of expected results. For instance:
    1. Keratometry measurements are clustered together.
    1. Heel bone mineral density are also clustered together.
    1. See other clusters.
1. We should also include some "novel" clusters, or expected clusters with some novel traits in it.
    1. Lipids cluster? I'm working on this now.
1. Once we focus on a cluster, we provide an interpreation of why those traits are clustered
   together (which LVs are driving the association). Here we'll need to explain the method we might
   be using for this (decision trees on the original data). This could be a separate section.
:::


![
**Clustering of traits using matrix $\mathbf{T}^{\top}$.**
<!--  -->
Estimation of number of clusters using the consensus index method [@Vinh2010]. A spectral clustering
approach was used on matrix $\mathbf{T}^{\top}$ to group traits. The algorithm was run 100 times for
each $k$ value from 2 to 20, and the averaged adjusted Rand-index is reported in $y$-axis (top). A
partition with $k=13$ was obtained from $\mathbf{T}^{\top}$ (bottom), where ketatometry and heel
bone mineral density measurements clearly separate from the rest of traits. `Add svg version`{.red}
<!--  -->
](images/lvs_clustering/traits_clustering.png "Traits partition with k=13"){#fig:traits_clusters
height=5in}


![
**The top discriminating latent variables for the keratometry cluster.**
<!--  -->
For clustering interpretation, a decision tree classifier was trained using the original data
($\mathbf{T}^{\top}$), the keratometry cluster as positive class, and the rest of traits as
negative class. The top associated latent variable was LV136, followed by LV767 and LV612 (which
were detected by removing LV136 and LV767 from the training data, respectively).
<!--  -->
`Add svg version.`{.red}
<!--  -->
](images/lvs_clustering/traits_clustering_features.png "Features discriminating keratometry
cluster"){#fig:kera_features height=5.5in}
