### Analysis of keratometry cluster reveals groups of genes associated with cardiovascular-related traits

::: {style="color: red"}
In this section, we build on our previous results to analyze a single or a couple of LVs. The idea
is to show raw MultiXcan/fastENLOC results and how individual genes in the module are associated
with the traits. Based on this, we could provide an interpretation (if possible) on how genes could
be affecting different and related traits/diseases.

These are some articles I found relating the trait categories in Figure @fig:lv136_traits (LV136).

1. Ocular problems and cardiovascular diseases:
    1. [(2017) The Relationship Between Cardiovascular Autonomic Dysfunction and Ocular Abnormality
       in Chinese T2DM](https://doi.org/10.1155/2017/7125760)
    1. [(2018) Looking into the eye of patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: an
       opportunity for better microvascular profiling of these complex
       patients](https://doi.org/10.1111/aos.13765)
        1. This one also relates spirometry.
    1. [(2018) Residual Vision Activation and the Brain-Eye-Vascular Triad: Dysregulation,
       Plasticity and Restoration in Low Vision and Blindness - A
       Review](https://doi.org/10.3233/rnn-180880)
    1. [(2017) Evaluating Ocular Blood Flow](https://doi.org/10.4103/ijo.ijo_330_17)
1. Spirometry and CVD:
    1. [(2019) Mysterious link between the restrictive ventilatory impairment in spirometry and
       cardiovascular disease](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.resinv.2019.01.006)
    1. [(2018) Declining Lung Function and Cardiovascular
       Risk](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jacc.2018.06.049)
    1. [(2018) Restrictive Spirometry and Cardiovascular Risk: Cause or
       Comorbidity?](https://doi.org/10.1513/AnnalsATS.201807-494ED)
    1. [(2011) Assessment of pulmonary function tests in cardiac
       patients](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jsha.2011.01.003)
    1. It would be nice to see if the direction of effect of these genes are positive for CVD and
       negative for FEV1.
:::


![
**Traits and diseases associated with top genes in LV136.**
<!--  -->
Categories of the top 40 traits associated with genes in LV136 (left), and associations of traits
with the top 20 genes in LV136 (right): S-MultiXcan associations ($-\log_{10}(p\mathrm{-value})$,
thresholded at 10) are shown with gradients, whereas fastENLOC colocalization probabilities are
depicted with different circle sizes (only for $>5\mathrm{\%}$). Colors used for trait categories
are the same in both subfigures.
<!--  -->
](images/lvs_analysis/lv136/lv136_traits_multixcan_fastenloc.svg "Traits/diseases associated with
LV136 in PhenoPLIER"){#fig:lv136_traits}


![
**Cell types found in top five studies (recount2) associated with LV136.**
<!--  -->
Genes associated with LV136 are highly expressed in MSC, osteoblast and fibroblast when considering
all conditions for the given cell types in the top five studies in recount2.
<!--  -->
MSC: mesenchymal stem cells; iPSC: induced pluripotent stem cells; ESC: embryonic stem cells.
<!--  -->
`We should consider more studies maybe, not just the top 5.`{.red}
`Remove colors.`{.red}
<!--  -->
](images/lvs_analysis/lv136/lv136_cell_types.svg "Conditions associated with LV136 in
PhenoPLIER"){#fig:lv136_conditions height=3in}
