### LV projections reveal trait clusters with shared transcriptomic properties

![
**Cluster analysis on traits using the latent gene expression representation.**
<!--  -->
**a)** The projection of TWAS results on $n$=3,752 traits into the latent gene expression representation is the input data to the clustering process.
A linear (PCA) and non-linear (UMAP) dimensionality reduction techniques were applied to the input data, and the three data versions were processed by five different clustering algorithms.
These algorithms derive partitions from the data using different sets of parameters (such as the number of clusters), leading to an ensemble of 4,428 partitions.
Then, a distance matrix is derived by counting how many times a pair of traits were grouped in different clusters across the ensemble.
Finally, a consensus function is applied to the distance matrix to generate consolidated partitions with different number of clusters (from 2 to $\sqrt{n}\approx$ 60).
These final solutions were represented in the clustering tree (Figure @fig:clustering:tree).
<!--  -->
**b)** The clusters found by the consensus function were used as labels to train a decision tree classifier on the original input data, which detects the LVs that better differentiate groups of traits.
<!--  -->
](images/clustering/clustering_design.svg "Cluster analysis on traits"){#fig:clustering:design width="100%"}


The previous results suggested that the compression into $\hat{\mathbf{M}}$ increases the signal-to-noise ratio.
Thus, we analyzed $\hat{\mathbf{M}}$ to find groups of traits that were affected by the same transcriptional processes.
To identify relationships that were robust to the selection of a specific clustering algorithm (each of which makes particular assumptions about the structure of data), we employed a consensus clustering approach.
Therefore, we applied different methods with varying sets of parameters and later combined these into a consolidated solution (Methods).
Our clustering pipeline generated 15 final consensus clustering solutions with 5 to 29 clusters (Supplementary Figure @fig:sup:consensus_agreement).
Instead of selecting a specific number of clusters, we used a clustering tree [@doi:10.1093/gigascience/giy083] (Figure @fig:clustering:tree) to examine stable groups of traits across multiple resolutions.
To understand which latent variables differentiated the group of traits, we trained a decision tree classifier on the input data $\hat{\mathbf{M}}$ using the clusters found as labels.


![
**Clustering tree using multiple resolutions for clusters of traits.**
<!--  -->
Each row represents a partition/grouping of the traits, and each circle is a cluster from that partition.
The number of clusters go from 5 to 29.
Arrows indicate how traits in one cluster move across clusters from different partitions.
Most of the clusters are preserved across different resolutions, showing highly stable solutions even with independent runs of the clustering algorithm.
<!--  -->
RDW: red cell (erythrocyte) distribution width;
BMI: body mass index;
WC: waist circumference;
HC: hip circumference;
RA: rheumatoid arthritis;
SLE: systemic lupus erythematosus;
HTN: Hypertension;
IBD: inflammatory bowel disease;
SCZ: Schizophrenia;
CAD: Coronary artery disease;
AD: Alzheimer's disease;
<!--  -->
*Descriptions of traits by cluster ID (from left to right):*
12: also includes lymphocyte count and allergies such as allergic rhinitis or eczema;
4: includes reticulocyte count and percentage, immature reticulocyte fraction, and high light scatter reticulocytes count and percentage;
2: includes mean corpuscular volume, mean corpuscular hemoglobin, mean reticulocyte volume, mean sphered cell volume;
5: includes erythrocyte count, hemoglobin concentration, and hematocrit percentage;
20: also includes weight, waist and hip circumference;
18: also includes body impedance measures and ankle spacing width;
19: also includes basal metabolic rate;
1: includes platelet count, crit, mean volume, and distribution width;
13: diabetes refers to age when diabetes was first diagnosed;
25: also includes vascular problems such as angina, deep vein thrombosis (DVT), intraocular pressure, eye and mouth problems, pulse rate, hand-grip strength, several measurements of physical activity, jobs involving heavy physical work, types of transport used, intake of vitamin/mineral supplements, and various types of body pain and medications for pain relief;
21: also includes attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), number of years of schooling completed, bone density, and intracranial volume measurement;
28: includes diabetes, gout, arthrosis, and respiratory diseases (and related medications such as ramipril, allopurinol, and lisinopril), urine assays, female-specific factors (age at menarche, menopause, first/last live birth), and several environmental/behavioral factors such as intake of a range of food/drink items including alcohol, time spent outdoors and watching TV, smoking and sleeping habits, early-life factors (breastfed as a baby, maternal smoking around birth), education attainment, psychological and mental health, and health satisfaction;
11: also includes fasting blood glucose and insulin measurement;
16: lipids include high and low-density lipoprotein (HDL and LDL) cholesterol, triglycerides, and average number of methylene groups per a double bond;
14: includes myocardial infarction, coronary atherosclerosis, ischaemic heart disease (wide definition);
7: includes monocyte count and percentage;
24: includes lymphocyte count and percentage;
9: includes neutrophil count, neutrophil+basophil count, neutrophil+eosinophil count, granulocyte count, leukocyte count, and myeloid cell count;
3: includes eosinophil count, eosinophil percentage, and eosinophil+basophil count.
](images/clustering/clustering_tree.svg "Clustering tree on groups of traits"){#fig:clustering:tree width="100%"}


We found that phenotypes grouped into five clear branches (Figure @fig:clustering:tree).
These were
0) a "large" branch that includes most of the traits subdivided only starting at $k$=16 (with asthma, subjective well-being traits, and nutrient intake clusters),
1) heel bone-densitometry measurements,
2) hematological assays on red blood cells,
3) physical measures, including spirometry and body impedance, and anthropometric traits with fat-free and fat mass measures in separate sub-branches, and
4) a "complex" branch including keratometry measurements, assays on white blood cells and platelets, skin and hair color traits, autoimmune disorders (type 1 diabetes, psoriasis, hyper/hypothyroidism, rheumatoid arthritis, systemic lupus erythematosus, celiac disease), and cardiovascular diseases (hypertension, coronary artery disease, myocardial infraction, hypercholesterolemia, and other cardiovascular-related traits such hand-grip strength [@pmid:25982160], and environmental/behavioral factors such as physical activity and diet) (See Supplementary Files 2-6 for clustering results).
Within these branches, results were relatively stable.
The same traits were often clustered together across different resolutions, even with the consensus algorithm using random initializations at each level.
Arrows between different clusters show traits moving from one group to another across different resolutions.
This mainly happens between clusters within the "complex" branch, and between clusters from the "large" branch to the "complex" branch.
We would expect that continuing to explore higher dimensionalities would result in further subdivisions of these large groupings.
This behavior was expected since complex diseases are usually associated with shared genetic and environmental factors and are thus hard to categorize into a single cluster.
We would also expect that exploring solutions with a larger number of clusters would result in further subdivisions of these large groupings.


![
**Cluster-specific and general transcriptional processes associated with disease.**
The plot shows a submatrix of $\hat{\mathbf{M}}$ for the main trait clusters at $k$=29, considering only LVs (rows) that are well-aligned with at least one pathway.
Standardized values from -5 (lighter color) to 16 (darker color).
](images/clustering/global_clustermap-plain.svg "Heatmap with gene modules and traits"){#fig:clustering:heatmap width="100%"}


Next, we analyzed which LVs were driving these clusters of traits.
We trained decision tree classifiers on the input data (Figure @fig:clustering:design) using each cluster at $k$=29 (bottom of Figure @fig:clustering:tree) as labels (see Methods).
This yielded for each cluster the top LVs, where several of them were well-aligned to existing pathways (Figure @fig:clustering:heatmap), and others were novel and expressed in relevant tissues (Supplementary Figure @fig:sup:clustering:novel:heatmap).
In Figure @fig:clustering:heatmap it can be seen that some LVs were highly specific to certain types of traits, while others were associated with a wide range of different phenotypes, thus potentially involved in more general biological functions.
For example, LVs such as LV928 and LV30, which were well-aligned to early progenitors of the erythrocytes lineage [@doi:10.1016/j.cell.2011.01.004] (Supplementary Tables @tbl:sup:multiplier_pathways:lv928 and @tbl:sup:multiplier_pathways:lv30), were predominantly expressed in early differentiation stages of erythropoiesis (Supplementary Figures @fig:sup:lv928 and @fig:sup:lv30), and strongly associated with different assays on red blood cells (FDR < 0.05; Supplementary Tables @tbl:sup:phenomexcan_assocs:lv928, @tbl:sup:emerge_assocs:lv928, and @tbl:sup:emerge_assocs:lv30).
In contrast, other LVs were highly specific, such as LV730, which is expressed in thrombocytes from different cancer samples (Supplementary Figures @fig:sup:lv730 and Supplementary Table @tbl:sup:multiplier_pathways:lv730), and strongly associated with hematological assays on platelets (FDR < 2e-4, Supplementary Table @tbl:sup:phenomexcan_assocs:lv730);
or LV598, whose genes were expressed in corneal endothelial cells (Supplementary Figures @fig:sup:lv598 and Supplementary Table @tbl:sup:multiplier_pathways:lv598) and associated with keratometry measurements (FDR < 4e-05; Supplementary Table @tbl:sup:phenomexcan_assocs:lv598).


The autoimmune diseases sub-branch also had significant LVs associations expressed in relevant cell types.
LV844 was the most strongly associated gene module with autoimmune disorders in both PhenomeXcan (FDR < 7e-16; Supplementary Tables @tbl:sup:phenomexcan_assocs:lv844) and eMERGE (FDR < 2e-6, @tbl:sup:emerge_assocs:lv844), and was expressed in a wide range of cell types, including blood, breast organoids, myeloma cells, lung fibroblasts, and different cell types from the brain (Supplementary Figures @fig:sup:lv844 and Supplementary Table @tbl:sup:multiplier_pathways:lv844).
LV155 was strongly expressed in thyroid (Supplementary Figures @fig:sup:lv155 and Supplementary Table @tbl:sup:multiplier_pathways:lv155), and significantly associated with hypothyroidism both in PhenomeXcan (FDR < 0.05, Supplementary Table @tbl:sup:phenomexcan_assocs:lv155) and eMERGE (FDR < 0.10, Supplementary Table @tbl:sup:emerge_assocs:lv155).
Other important LVs associated with autoimmunity in both PhenomeXcan and eMERGE were LV57 expressed in T cells (Supplementary Figure @fig:sup:lv57 and Supplementary Tables @tbl:sup:multiplier_pathways:lv57, @tbl:sup:phenomexcan_assocs:lv57, @tbl:sup:emerge_assocs:lv57), and LV54 expressed in different soft tissue tumors, breast, lung, pterygia and epithelial cells (Supplementary Figure @fig:sup:lv54 and Supplementary Tables @tbl:sup:multiplier_pathways:lv54, @tbl:sup:phenomexcan_assocs:lv54, @tbl:sup:emerge_assocs:lv54).


The cardiovascular sub-branch also exhibited significant associations.
LV847 (Supplementary Figure @fig:sup:lv847 and Supplementary Table @tbl:sup:multiplier_pathways:lv847) was strongly associated with hypertension in PhenomeXcan (FDR < 2e-13, Supplementary Tables @tbl:sup:phenomexcan_assocs:lv847) and several cardiovascular diseases, type 1 diabetes, prostate cancer, and others in eMERGE (FDR < 0.05, Supplementary Table @tbl:sup:emerge_assocs:lv847).
LV847 was expressed in CD19 (B cells) (which are related to preeclampsia [@doi:10.1161/HYPERTENSIONAHA.111.188276]), Jurkat cells (T lymphocyte cells), and cervical carcinoma cell lines (the uterus was previously reported to be linked to blood pressure through a potential hormonal pathway [@doi:10.1038/s41467-018-06022-6; @doi:10.1007/s11906-006-0080-1]).
LV136 was aligned with known collagen formation and muscle contraction pathways (Supplementary Table @tbl:sup:multiplier_pathways:lv136), and it was associated with coronary artery disease (FDR < 2e-8), myocardial infarction (FDR < 6e-4) and keratometry measurements (FDR < 1e-7) in PhenomeXcan (Supplementary Tables @tbl:sup:phenomexcan_assocs:lv136), but with no strong associations in eMERGE (FDR < 0.20, Supplementary Table @tbl:sup:emerge_assocs:lv136).
This LV was expressed in a wide range of cell types, including fibroblasts, mesenchymal stem cells, osteoblasts, pancreatic stellate cells, cardiomyocytes, and adipocytes (Supplementary Figure @fig:sup:lv136).
Lipids, clustered with chronotype and Alzheimer's disease, were significantly associated with several modules expressed mainly in brain cell types, including LV93 (Supplementary Figure @fig:sup:lv93 and Supplementary Tables @tbl:sup:multiplier_pathways:lv93, @tbl:sup:phenomexcan_assocs:lv93, @tbl:sup:emerge_assocs:lv93), LV206 (Supplementary Figure @fig:sup:lv206 and Supplementary Tables @tbl:sup:multiplier_pathways:lv206, @tbl:sup:phenomexcan_assocs:lv206, @tbl:sup:emerge_assocs:lv206), and LV260 (Supplementary Figure @fig:sup:lv260 and Supplementary Tables @tbl:sup:multiplier_pathways:lv260, @tbl:sup:phenomexcan_assocs:lv260 and @tbl:sup:emerge_assocs:lv260).
These modules were associated mainly with cardiovascular traits in eMERGE.


Within the cardiovascular sub-branch, we found neuropsychiatric and neurodevelopmental disorders such as Alzheimer's disease, schizophrenia, and attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD).
These disorders were previously linked to the cardiovascular system [@pmid:12093424; @doi:10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.113.002065; @doi:10.1192/bjp.bp.117.202606; @doi:10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.118.313563], and share several risk factors, including hypertension, high cholesterol, obesity, smoking, among others [@doi:10.1186/s12916-014-0206-2; @doi:10.1111/j.1076-7460.2007.06696.x].
In our results, however, these diseases were grouped by potentially shared transcriptional processes expressed in specific tissues/cell types.
Alzheimer's disease, for example, was significantly associated with LV21 in PhenomeXcan (FDR < 2e-19, Supplementary Table @tbl:sup:phenomexcan_assocs:lv21) and with LV5 (FDR < 3e-3, Supplementary Table @tbl:sup:phenomexcan_assocs:lv5).
LV21 was strongly expressed in a variety of soft tissue sarcomas, monocytes/macrophages (including microglia from cortex samples), and aortic valves (Supplementary Figure @fig:sup:lv21 and Supplementary Table @tbl:sup:multiplier_pathways:lv21).
This LV was also associated with lipids: LDL cholesterol (FDR < 1e-4) and triglycerides (FDR < 0.02).
As discussed previously, macrophages play a key role in the reverse cholesterol transport and thus atherogenesis [@doi:10.1093/qjmed/hci136], and lipid metabolism in microglia has been recently identified as an important factor in the development of neurodegenerative diseases [@doi:10.3389/fphys.2020.00393].
On the other hand, LV5 was expressed in breast cancer and brain glioma samples, microglia (cortex), liver, and kidney, among other cell types (Supplementary Figure @fig:sup:lv5 and Supplementary Table @tbl:sup:multiplier_pathways:lv5).
In addition to lipids, LV5 was also associated with depression traits from the UK Biobank (FDR < 0.05, Supplementary Table @tbl:sup:phenomexcan_assocs:lv5).
Since Alzheimer's disease was not present in eMERGE, we could not replicate this association.
ADHD was the only significantly associated trait for LV434 (FDR < 6e-3) (Supplementary Table @tbl:sup:phenomexcan_assocs:lv434), which was expressed in breast cancer and glioma cells, cerebral organoids, and several different cell populations from the brain: fetal neurons (replicating and quiescence), microglia, and astrocytes (Supplementary Figure @fig:sup:lv434 and Supplementary Table @tbl:sup:multiplier_pathways:lv434).
Schizophrenia was not significantly associated (FDR < 0.05) with any gene module tested in our analysis.
None of these LVs were significantly aligned to prior pathways, which might represent potentially novel transcriptional processes affecting the cardiovascular and central nervous systems.
