## Discussion

We have developed a novel computational approach that combines statistical associations from TWAS with groups of genes (gene modules) that have similar expression patterns in the same cell types.
Our approach is unique in that it uses a latent representation derived from measures of normal tissue, as well as from cell types exposed to different stimuli and at various developmental stages.
This improves interpretation by providing insight into the cell type-specific features of complex phenotypes beyond just statistical associations.
Our method was able to identify relevant cell types from summary statistics, and many of the disease-associated gene modules were replicated in eMERGE.
Additionally, a CRISPR screen to analyze lipid regulation revealed our gene module-based approach can prioritize causal genes, even when single gene associations are not detected.
This supports an omnigenic perspective of "core" and "peripheral" genes, suggesting our approach can identify genes that directly affect the trait without mediated regulation of other genes, and therefore prioritize alternative therapeutic targets.


By using our gene module perspective, we were able to integrate drug-induced transcriptional profiles, connecting diseases, drugs, and cell types.
We found that the LV-based drug-repurposing approach was more effective than the gene-based one when predicting drug-disease links for 322 drugs across 53 diseases.
To further explore the potential of our approach, we focused on cardiovascular traits and a particular drug, niacin.
This revealed that the approach can link pathophysiological processes with known mechanisms of action, such as those in adipose tissue, immune cells, and ovarian granulosa cells.
Our LV-based approach could be a useful tool for generating new hypotheses to evaluate potential mechanisms of action, or even adverse effects, of known or experimental drugs.


Our analysis of associations through latent representations revealed reasonable groupings of diseases and traits affected by shared and distinct transcriptional mechanisms expressed in relevant tissues.
Our cluster analysis approach detected the latent variables (LVs) that were most discriminative for each cluster.
Several of these LVs were also significantly associated with different traits.
Some LVs were strongly aligned with known pathways, while others (like LV57) were not, potentially representing novel disease-relevant mechanisms.
In some cases, the features/LVs linked to phenotypes appeared to be associated with specific cell types.
This may reveal potentially causal cell types for a phenotype with greater precision.
We observed modules expressed primarily in one tissue (such as adipose in LV246 or ovary in LV66).
Others seemed to be expressed in many contexts, which may capture pathways associated with related complex diseases.
For example, LV136 is associated with cardiovascular disease and measures of corneal biomechanics and is expressed in fibroblasts, osteoblasts, pancreas, liver, and cardiomyocytes, among others.
Other examples include LV844, expressed in whole blood samples and associated with a range of autoimmune diseases; or LV57, which is clearly expressed in T cells and strongly associated with autoimmune and venous thromboembolism.
Our projection through a representation learned on complementary but distinct datasets is a novel approach to identifying cell type and pathway effects on complex phenotypes that is computationally simple to implement.
This approach may provide insight into the etiology of disease and potential therapeutic targets, and may even enable drug repurposing.


We demonstrated that clustering trees, initially used to examine developmental processes in single-cell data, provide a multi-resolution grouping of phenotypes based on latent variable associations.
We used hard-partitioning algorithms, which assign one trait exclusively to one cluster, and take into account all gene modules when measuring the distance between two traits.
However, it is also possible that two complex diseases share only a few biological processes instead of being similar across most of them.
Additionally, our TWAS results were derived from a large set of GWAS with varying sample sizes and qualities.
Although we addressed potential issues from data heterogeneity before performing our cluster analyses, data preprocessing steps may still introduce bias.
Previous studies have shown that considering groups of related diseases is more powerful in detecting shared genetic etiology [@doi:10.1038/ng.3985; @doi:10.1038/s41588-018-0121-0], and clustering trees offer a way to explore such relationships in the context of latent variables.


Finally, we developed a regression framework based on latent variables (LVs) to detect whether gene modules are associated with a trait.
We used PhenomeXcan as a discovery cohort across four thousand traits and found 3,450 significant LV-trait associations (FDR < 0.05) with 686 LVs associated with at least one trait and 1,176 traits associated with at least one LV.
Many of these associations replicated in eMERGE, where we identified 196 significant LV-trait associations, with 116 LVs associated with at least one trait/phecode and 81 traits with at least one LV.
We focused on a few disease types from our trait clusters, and the complete set of associations on other disease domains is available in our Github repository.
However, one limitation of the regression approach is that the gene-gene correlations are only approximately accurate, which could lead to false positives if the correlation among the top genes in a module is not precisely captured.
Fortunately, our regression model is approximately well-calibrated and we did not observe inflation when running the method in real data.


Our approach assumes that gene modules with coordinated expression patterns will be associated with coordinated pathological effects.
We implemented two complementary approaches: MultiPLIER and TWAS.
MultiPLIER extracts latent variables from large expression datasets, which could represent either real transcriptional processes or technical factors.
We used a model derived from recount2, which was designed to analyze rare disorders, but could be replaced with other similar approaches such as GenomicSuperSignature.
TWAS considers the hypothesis that GWAS loci affect traits via changes in gene expression, but has limitations that can lead to false positives.
TWAS usually identifies several genes within the same locus due to sharing of GWAS variants in gene expression models, correlated expression of nearby genes, or correlation of their predicted expression due to eQTLs in linkage disequilibrium.
Our latent variable-based regression framework, however, accounts for these gene-gene correlations in TWAS.


This could be further improved by using a multi-tissue approach to identify the most relevant tissue for drug-disease associations.

Our findings are in line with previous studies that have found that drugs with genetic support are more likely to be successful during the drug development process [@doi:10.1038/ng.3314; @doi:10.1038/nn.4618].
By projecting association results through latent variables, we were able to prioritize disease-treatment pairs more effectively than if we had only considered single-gene effects.
Additionally, the latent variables that drove our predictions were interpretable, allowing us to infer potential mechanisms of action.
We prioritized drugs for diseases with very different tissue etiologies, and a limitation of our approach is that we had to select the most appropriate tissue model from TWAS to identify reversed transcriptome patterns between genes and drug-induced perturbations.
To improve our approach, we could use a multi-tissue approach to determine the most relevant tissue for drug-disease associations.


Ultimately, the quality of the representations is essential to performance.
Here we used a representation derived from a factorization of bulk RNA-seq data.
Detailed perturbation datasets and single-cell profiling of tissues, with and without perturbagens, and at various stages of development can generate higher quality and more interpretable representations.
To interpret the results, it is important to annotate sample metadata.
New approaches to infer and annotate with structured metadata are promising and can be directly applied to existing data [@doi:10.1101/2021.05.10.443525].
These improvements in both areas set the stage for latent variable projections to be widely used to understand the genetic basis of complex human phenotypes.
Our method can provide a new perspective for a mechanistic understanding of statistical associations from TWAS and generate testable hypotheses for the post-GWAS functional characterization of complex diseases, which will likely be an important area of research in the coming years.
