## Acknowledgements

This study was funded by:
the Gordon and Betty Moore Foundation (GBMF 4552 to C.S. Greene; GBMF 4560 to B.D. Sullivan),
the National Human Genome Research Institute (R01 HG010067 to C.S. Greene, S.F.A. Grant and B.D. Sullivan; K99 HG011898 and R00 HG011898 to M. Pividori; U01 HG011181 to W. Wei),
the National Cancer Institute (R01 CA237170 to C.S. Greene),
the Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human Development (R01 HD109765 to C.S. Greene),
the National Institute of Aging (R01AG069900 to W. Wei),
the National Institute of General Medical Sciences (R01 GM139891 to W. Wei);
the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute (R01 HL163854 to Q. Feng);
the National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases (DK126194 to B.F. Voight);
the Daniel B. Burke Endowed Chair for Diabetes Research to S.F.A. Grant.

Figure {@fig:entire_process}a was created with BioRender.com.


## Author contributions statement

M. Pividori and C.S. Greene conceived and designed the study.
M. Pividori designed the computational methods, performed the experiments, analyzed the data, interpreted the results, and drafted the manuscript.
C.S. Greene supervised the entire project and provided critical guidance throughout the study.
S. Lu, C. Su, and M.E. Johnson performed the CRISPR screen with the supervision of S.F.A. Grant.
B. Li provided the transcription-wide association results for eMERGE for replication, and this analysis was supervised by M.D. Ritchie.
All authors revised the manuscript and provided critical feedback.

## Competing interests statement

The authors declare no competing interests.
